## Conclusions

DESI mass spectrometry and transmission Raman spectroscopy are effective methods to acquire characteristic spectral information from solid oral dosage forms containing information about active ingredients and tablet coating components. 
These tools provide complementary information: transmission Raman is slightly biased in sensitivity towards the bulk of the tablet, whereas DESI MS provides sensitive analysis of the surface coating. 
A range of machine learning algorithms were found to be capable of classifying tablet type with high precision and recall. 
Of these, support vector machines showed the strongest performance for DESI MS, while LDA was the most effective for transmission Raman data.  

DESI-based classification was primarily based on differences in the tablet coatings, whereas transmission Raman was more sensitive to differences in the active pharmaceutical ingredients due to their higher total content. 
Therefore, it may be advantageous to combine these two complementary analytical methods. 
Raman spectroscopy’s non-destructive nature makes it potentially more suitable for in-line analysis than DESI MS, the destructive nature, even if minimally, of which makes it unsuitable for tablets remaining in the supply chain. 
Classification performance was retained on datasets of reduced peak number and simulated reduced mass resolving power, indicating the robustness of this approach and its potential applicability to compact mass spectrometers suitable for deployment in counterfeiting, QA/QC, or production line environments.  

